Domenico "Mimmo" Battaglia[a] (born 20 January 1963) is an Italian Catholic prelate who has been Archbishop of Naples since 2020. He was previously Bishop of Cerreto Sannita-Telese-Sant'Agata de' Goti from 2016 to 2020. He was made a cardinal on 7 December 2024 by Pope Francis, the last nominated before Pope Francis's death. Domenico Battaglia was born on 20 January 1963 in Satriano in the province of Catanzaro. He studied philosophy and theology at the Pontifical Regional Seminary San Pio X in Catanzaro. After being ordained a priest on 6 February 1988, he was Rector of the Archiepiscopal Preparatory Seminary of Catanzaro and a member of the Diocesan Commission for Justice and Peace from 1989 to 1992, parish administrator in Sant'Elia, parish priest of Madonna del Carmine in Catanzaro, Director of the Diocesan Office for Missionary Cooperation between Churches, and parish priest in Satriano from 1992 to 1999. He was collaborator of the Shrine of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Torre di Ruggiero, parish collaborator in Montepaone Lido and administrator of the parish of Santa Maria di Altavilla in Satriano. In 1992 he became President of the Calabrese Solidarity Center, which supports efforts to recover from drug addiction and is associated with the Italian Federation of Therapeutic Communities (Italian: Federazione italiana delle comunità terapeutiche or FICT). From 2000 to 2006 he was Vice President of the Bethany Foundation (Italian: Fondazione Betania) a non-profit organization that operates rehabilitation centers and residential healthcare facilities in the provinces of Catanzaro and Vibo Valentia. From 2006 to 2015 he was National President of FICT. Pope Francis named him Bishop of Cerreto Sannita-Telese-Sant’Agata de 'Goti on 24 June 2016. He was the first priest of the diocese to become a bishop since 1960. He received his episcopal consecration on 3 September from Archbishop Vincenzo Bertolone and was installed on 2 October. He chose as his episcopal motto "Confide Surge Vocat Te" (Take heart, Stand Up, He is Calling) from Mark 10:49. While a bishop, he continued his work as a "street priest", which earned him the sobriquet "Bergoglio of the South". In a pastoral letter in April 2020, he said that the COVID-19 pandemic had "exposed the fragility of this world of ours ... the weakness of that economy which, both locally and globally, was considered the single goal, and was seen and applauded as the only route, without any restraints, to human happiness on earth". Pope Francis appointed Battaglia as Archbishop of Naples on 12 December 2020. His installation was on 2 February 2021.

Role: Archbishop of Naples
Country: Italy
Order: CP

Political Analysis: Domenico Battaglia's biography suggests a strong leaning towards the progressive end of the spectrum within the Catholic Church's political context. His background as a "street priest" and his focus on social issues, such as drug addiction recovery and economic fragility highlighted during the COVID-19 pandemic, align with a more liberal approach to pastoral care and social justice. His involvement with organizations like the Calabrese Solidarity Center and the Bethany Foundation, which are dedicated to rehabilitation and healthcare, further indicates a commitment to addressing societal issues from a compassionate and progressive standpoint. Additionally, his episcopal motto "Confide Surge Vocat Te" reflects an encouraging and inclusive approach to ministry, resonating with progressive themes of hope and action. His nomination by Pope Francis, known for his own progressive stances, as the last cardinal before the Pope's death, could also imply a shared vision and alignment with more reform-oriented perspectives within the Church. Battaglia's focus on the global economy's weaknesses, as revealed by the pandemic, and his critique of unrestrained pursuit of human happiness through economic means alone, suggest a critical stance towards traditional capitalist values, aligning him with progressive theological positions that emphasize social justice and the common good.