Leopoldo José Brenes Solórzano (Spanish pronunciation: [le.oˈpol.do xoˈse ˈβɾenes soˈloɾsano]; born 7 March 1949) is a Nicaraguan prelate of the Catholic Church who has been Archbishop of Managua since 2005. He was made a cardinal in 2014. He was an auxiliary bishop in Managua from 1988 to 1991 and Bishop of Matagalpa from 1991 to 2005. Leopoldo Brenes was born in Ticuantepe on 7 March 1949 into a poor family, one of four children born to Lilliam Solórzano Aguirre and Leo Leopoldo Brenes Flores. He studied at the Rural School of Ticuantepe, the Cristóbal Rugada School of Masaya, and the Escuela Normal of Managua and then continued his secondary studies at the National Institute of Masaya and at Colegio San José de Calasanz. He then studied philosophy at the National Seminary Nuestra Señora de Fátima of Managua and theology in Mexico at the Superior Institute of Ecclesiastical Studies (ISEE). He earned a bachelor's degree in theology at the Pontifical Gregorian University and a licentiate in dogmatic theology at the Pontifical Lateran University. He was ordained a deacon on 13 January 1974. He was ordained a priest in Managua on 16 August 1974 by Miguel Obando Bravo. He then served in a number of roles, including priest in the parishes of Tisma, Las Brisas, la Asunción, and St. Pius X in Managua, and vicar for pastoral care and substitute vicar general of the Archdiocese of Managua. He was later a parish priest of Sagrada Familia, María Inmaculada, San Pío X, Espíritu Santo and Santa Rosa and San Agustín in Managua, and vicar for pastoral care of the Archdiocese of Managua and episcopal vicar for vocations and ministries. Pope John Paul II named him titular bishop of Maturba and appointed him auxiliary bishop of Managua on 13 February 1988. He was consecrated a bishop on 19 March 1988 in the cathedral of Managua by Cardinal Miguel Obando Bravo, Archbishop of Managua, assisted by Paolo Giglio, apostolic nuncio to Nicaragua, and Arturo Rivera Damas, Archbishop of San Salvador. His episcopal motto is Tu me has enviado. He was made Bishop of Matagalpa on 2 November 1991 and appointed Archbishop of Managua on 1 April 2005, the day before John Paul II's death. He took possession of the see on 21 May.[citation needed] He received the pallium from Pope Benedict XVI on 29 June 2005. In the Episcopal Conference of Nicaragua he has been president of the Commission for Vocations and Ministries; secretary general of the Episcopal Conference; president of Cáritas Nacional; president of the Commission for Catechesis; and president of the Commission for Social Communications. He has served as a delegate for the Eucharistic Congresses, delegate to the Special Assembly for Latin America of the Synod of Bishops, delegate to the Latin American Episcopal Council (CELAM), president of the CELAM Commission Family-Life-Youth, and president of the Episcopal Secretariat of Central America (SEDAC). He has been vice-president of the Episcopal Conference of Nicaragua and its president, became president in 2006. He ended a term as president in 2021, when he was elected to a three-year term as vice-president.

Role: Archbishop of Managua
Country: Nicaragua
Order: CP

Political Analysis: Cardinal Leopoldo José Brenes Solórzano's biography suggests a moderate stance within the spectrum of Catholic Church politics, leaning slightly towards conservatism. His long-standing service in various capacities, including significant roles within the Episcopal Conference of Nicaragua and regional ecclesiastical bodies like CELAM and SEDAC, indicates a deep commitment to the institutional Church and its governance structures, which often correlates with a more conservative approach to Church doctrine and tradition. His education at the Pontifical Gregorian University and the Pontifical Lateran University, institutions known for rigorous theological training within the heart of the Church's doctrinal tradition, further supports this classification. However, his active involvement in pastoral care, vocations, and social communications, as well as leading Cáritas Nacional, points towards a pastoral sensitivity and openness to addressing contemporary social issues, which are traits more commonly associated with a moderate or even progressive stance. The lack of specific information on his views regarding hot-button issues (e.g., LGBTQ+ rights, women's ordination, clerical celibacy) makes it difficult to classify him as strongly conservative or liberal. Therefore, a score of -0.2 is assigned, reflecting a position that is conservative but not rigidly traditionalist, open to pastoral and social concerns within the framework of established Church doctrine and governance.