Michael Felix Czerny SJ (born 18 July 1946) is a Czech-born Canadian Catholic prelate who has served as prefect of the Dicastery for Promoting Integral Human Development since 2022. He was under secretary of the dicastery's Migrants and Refugees Section from 2017 to 2022. Pope Francis made him a cardinal in 2019. A member of the Jesuits, Czerny has worked to promote social justice in Canada, Latin America, Africa, and Rome. Michael Czerny was born in Brno, Czechoslovakia, on 18 July 1946. His mother's family were Jewish converts to Catholicism. After the Nazis occupied Czechoslovakia, his maternal grandparents and two of his mother's brothers were interned in Terezín, where his grandfather died. The others were moved to Auschwitz and the brothers died in labor camps. Michael's mother, because she was Jewish, was forced into farm labor and then imprisoned for 20 months; his father was forced to farm labor for refusing to divorce her. His parents immigrated to Canada by ship in 1948, bringing Michael and his brother. Following his 1963 graduation from Loyola High School in Montreal, Czerny joined the Jesuits on 14 August 1964. He did his novitiate in Guelph, Ontario, and then studied classics and philosophy at Gonzaga University in Spokane, Washington, earning his bachelor's degree in classics and philosophy in 1968. He taught for a year at Gonzaga High School in St. John's, he pursued further studies in theology in Chicago and at Regis College in Toronto. On 9 June 1973 he was ordained a priest for the Upper Canadian Province (now the Jesuit Province of Canada) in Willowdale, Ontario. He obtained his doctorate in interdisciplinary studies from the University of Chicago in 1978. Czerny co-founded the Jesuit Centre for Social Faith and Justice in Toronto in 1979, and he was the first director until 1989. In 1990–1991, following the murder of six Jesuits and others at the University of Central America in San Salvador, he assumed the director's role of the university's Institute for Human Rights (IDHUCA), a position that had been held by one of the murdered priests. He was also Vice-Rector for Social Outreach.[citation needed]

Role: Prefect of theDicastery for Promoting Integral Human Development
Country: Canada
Order: CD

Political Analysis: Michael Felix Czerny's extensive work and positions within the Catholic Church suggest a strong leaning towards the liberal/progressive end of the spectrum. His leadership roles in promoting social justice, both in Canada and internationally, align with a more progressive approach to Catholic doctrine and social teachings. His involvement with the Jesuit Centre for Social Faith and Justice, and later with the Institute for Human Rights in El Salvador following the murder of Jesuit priests, underscores a commitment to social issues and reform, particularly in areas concerning human rights and social outreach. His appointment by Pope Francis, a pontiff known for his progressive stances on various issues, as a cardinal and his role as prefect of the Dicastery for Promoting Integral Human Development further reinforce his alignment with progressive elements within the Church, especially in terms of engagement with contemporary issues and an inclusive approach to pastoral care. Czerny's background as a Jesuit, a religious order often associated with social justice and reform within the Church, and his personal history related to the Holocaust, likely inform his theological positions and pastoral priorities, emphasizing mercy, social justice, and the integral development of the human person.