Odilo Pedro Scherer (Portuguese pronunciation: [oˈdʒilu ˈpedɾu ˈʃɛɾeʁ]; born 21 September 1949) is a Brazilian cardinal of the Catholic Church. Since 2007 he has been the Archbishop of São Paulo, where he was auxiliary bishop from 2001 to 2007. From 1994 to 2001 he worked in the Roman Curia at the Congregation for Bishops. Pope Benedict XVI made him a cardinal in 2007. Scherer was mentioned in the international media as a possible contender to succeed Benedict in 2013. When Scherer submitted his resignation as required at the age of 75, Pope Francis asked him to serve for two more years. He has been described as "an intellectual with great command of finance and economics" and "on the bookish side". His theology and pastoral approach has been called "considered to be theologically moderate, though in his own country he is seen as fairly conservative". In style he is reserved. He eschews the politics and language of liberation theology, but preaches and practices an evangelism devoted to the suffering of the poor and open to lay participation and charismatic movements. Scherer was born on 21 September 1949 in Cerro Largo, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. He was the seventh of eleven children born to Edwino and Francisca (née Steffens) Scherer, part of the German Brazilian community. His paternal great-grandfather Mathias emigrated from Theley, Saarland, in the early 1880s. Originally named "Otto", he adopted the name "Odilo" in his youth, preferring "its softer pronunciation".[a] His paternal uncle Alfredo Scherer was Archbishop of Porto Alegre from 1947 to 1981 and a cardinal from 1969 to 1996. After preparatory studies at the minor seminary of São José in Curitiba (Paraná) from 1963 to 1969, Scherer studied philosophy at Queen of the Apostles Major Seminary in Curitiba and at the Faculty of Education of the University of Passo Fundo (Rio Grande do Sul) from 1970 to 1975. He also studied philosophy at the Studium Theologicum, part of the Pontifical Catholic University of Paraná in Curitiba. On 7 December 1976 he was ordained a priest for the Diocese of Toledo by Bishop Armando Círio.[citation needed]

Role: Archbishop of São Paulo
Country: Brazil
Order: CP

Political Analysis: Cardinal Odilo Pedro Scherer exhibits a nuanced position within the Catholic Church's political and theological spectrum. His background and actions suggest a leaning towards conservatism, but with moderate tendencies that prevent him from being classified as staunchly traditionalist. His work in the Roman Curia and his acceptance by Pope Benedict XVI, a pope known for his conservative stance, as a cardinal, indicate a respect for Church hierarchy and tradition, aligning him with conservative elements within the Church. However, his theological moderation and pastoral approach, which emphasizes evangelism focused on the suffering of the poor and includes openness to lay participation and charismatic movements, demonstrate a more progressive inclination in terms of social justice and inclusivity. This blend of conservative views on Church doctrine and governance with a more progressive approach to pastoral care and social issues places him slightly towards the conservative end of the spectrum, but not at the extreme. His eschewal of liberation theology's politics and language, while still advocating for the poor, suggests a careful balance between traditional doctrine and contemporary social engagement. Therefore, a score of -0.2 accurately reflects his position as primarily conservative with moderate tendencies.