Oscar Cantoni (born 1 September 1950) is an Italian prelate of the Catholic Church who has been Bishop of Como since 2016. He was previously Bishop of Crema from 2005 to 2016. On 27 August 2022, Pope Francis made him a cardinal. Cantoni was born in Lenno on 1 September 1950 and had moved with his family to the nearby village, Tremezzo, at the age of eight. In 1970, after completing his studies at the Pontificio Collegio Gallio founded by the Somaschi Fathers, he entered the diocesan seminary to study theology. On 28 June 1975, Cantoni was ordained a priest of the Diocese of Como by bishop Teresio Ferraroni. Until 1982 he performed pastoral activity in the parish of Santa Maria Regina in Muggiò. He then taught religion at the technical institute Pliny Como. On 11 July 2000, he was awarded the title of Honorary Prelate of His Holiness by Pope John Paul II. In 2003 he became the diocese's episcopal vicar for clergy. Pope John Paul II appointed him Bishop of Crema on 25 January 2005.

Role: Bishop of Como
Country: Italy
Order: CP

Political Analysis: Based on the biographical text provided, Cardinal Oscar Cantoni appears to lean towards the conservative/traditionalist side of the spectrum within the Catholic Church context, though not to the extreme. His educational background with the Pontificio Collegio Gallio and ordination by Bishop Teresio Ferraroni, both of which are elements that suggest a strong foundation in traditional Catholic education and pastoral practice. His long tenure in pastoral activity and religious education before ascending to the episcopacy indicates a deep engagement with the Church's traditional roles of teaching and pastoral care. The fact that he was appointed by Pope John Paul II, who was known for his conservative stance on many Church doctrines and social issues, further suggests Cantoni's alignment with conservative values within the Church. However, the absence of specific information on his stance on Church doctrine, views on social issues, approach to pastoral care, position on Church governance, and engagement with contemporary issues prevents a full assessment as extremely conservative. Therefore, a score of -0.5 is assigned, indicating a conservative leaning but not at the far end of the spectrum.