Protase Rugambwa (born 31 May 1960) is a Tanzanian prelate of the Catholic Church who has been metropolitan archbishop of the Archdiocese of Tabora since November 2023, after serving as coadjutor there for seven months. He was a secretary of the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples from November 2017 to April 2023. He previously served as that congregation's adjunct secretary and president of the Pontifical Mission Societies from 2012 to 2017. Pope Francis made him a cardinal on 30 September 2023. Protase Rugambwa was born on 31 May 1960 at Bunena, in the diocese of Bukoba. He had an elder brother, Paulo Kishumba (1957-2021). He was given the name "Rugambwa" after Laurean Rugambwa, who had become Tanzania's first cardinal a few weeks earlier. After attending primary and secondary schools and Minor Seminary Katoke Itaga, Rugambwa studied philosophy at Kibosho Senior Seminary and theology at St. Charles Lwanga Segerea Senior Seminary. He was ordained a priest for the Diocese of Rulenge on 2 September 1990 in Dar-es-Salaam by Pope John Paul II during his pastoral visit to Tanzania. He was parish vicar of Mabira for 1990-91. He taught at the Minor Seminary of Katoke from 1991 to 1994, with responsibility for the liturgy and serving also as chaplain of Biharamulo hospital. From 1994 to 1998 he pursued a doctorate in pastoral theology at the Pontifical Lateran University. Returning to Tanzania, he was spiritual director of seminarians and director of vocations for the Diocese of Rulenge and executive director of the pastoral care department for 1998-99. From 2000 to 2002 he was Vicar General of the diocese of Rulenge and moderator of personnel. He worked in Rome on the staff of the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples from 2002 to 2008. On 18 January 2008, Pope Benedict XVI appointed Rugambwa bishop of the Diocese of Kigoma, Tanzania. He received his episcopal consecration on 13 April from Cardinal Polycarp Pengo, Archbishop of Dar-es-Salaam.

Role: Archbishop of Tabora
Country: Tanzania
Order: CP

Political Analysis: Cardinal Protase Rugambwa's biography suggests a moderate leaning towards the conservative/traditionalist side within the Catholic Church's political spectrum. His long-standing service in various capacities, including his role in the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples and as a bishop appointed by Pope Benedict XVI, indicates a strong alignment with the Church's missionary and doctrinal priorities. His academic pursuit in pastoral theology and roles emphasizing pastoral care, liturgy, and vocations point to a commitment to traditional pastoral and ecclesiastical roles. However, the lack of explicit mention of controversial social issues or reforms, combined with his elevation to cardinal by Pope Francis, who is known for a more progressive stance on certain issues, suggests Rugambwa might be open to contemporary pastoral approaches within a traditional framework. Therefore, his profile does not neatly fit into either extreme of the spectrum, leaning slightly conservative due to his emphasis on evangelization, doctrine, and pastoral care rooted in traditional roles and structures.