Soane Patita Paini Mafi (Tongan pronunciation: [soaːne patita paɪni mafi]) (born 19 December 1961) is a Tongan Catholic prelate who has served as Bishop of Tonga since 2008. Pope Francis made him the first cardinal from Tonga in 2015; he was then the youngest member of the College of Cardinals. Mafi was born into a strongly Catholic family. His father and grandfather were catechists. He grew up in Tonga and, as a young man, joined a youth group at his parish in Kolofo'ou near the capital Nuku'alofa on the main island of Tongatapu. He studied for the priesthood at the Pacific Regional Seminary in Suva, Fiji. He was ordained a priest in 1991 at the age of 29. He then spent four years in parish work on the Tongan island group of Ha'apai. In 1995 Bishop Foliaki appointed him Vicar-General of the diocese at the age of 34. He was only 5 years ordained. He spent three years studying religious education at Loyola University, Baltimore, Maryland, graduating in 2000. He was then stationed for six years in Suva (Fiji), engaged in the formation training of local priests. Mafi was appointed coadjutor bishop of Tonga in June 2007 and was consecrated bishop in that year. When he succeeded Bishop Soane Lilo Foliaki as Bishop of Tonga on 18 April 2008, he became the first diocesan priest to be bishop of the diocese of Tonga. His three predecessors were members of the Society of Mary. He participated in the Third Extraordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops on the Pastoral Challenges of the Family in the Context of Evangelization held on October 5–19, 2014. Mafi has been president of the Episcopal Conference of the Pacific since 2010.

Role: Bishop of Tonga
Country: Tonga
Order: CP

Political Analysis: Cardinal Soane Patita Paini Mafi's profile suggests a moderate leaning towards progressive tendencies within the Catholic Church, meriting a score of 0.3. His background and actions indicate a blend of adherence to tradition and openness to contemporary pastoral and social issues. His upbringing in a strongly Catholic family and his early involvement in parish youth groups reflect a solid foundation in Church tradition. His education at the Pacific Regional Seminary and further studies in religious education at Loyola University in Baltimore, Maryland, suggest an openness to diverse theological perspectives and an understanding of the global Church's challenges.

Mafi's rapid rise within the Church hierarchy, becoming a bishop only five years after ordination and later the youngest member of the College of Cardinals, appointed by Pope Francis, indicates a recognition and endorsement of his approach by the current, more progressive papacy. His participation in the Third Extraordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops on the Pastoral Challenges of the Family in the Context of Evangelization aligns him with the Church's contemporary efforts to address complex social issues within a pastoral framework.

As president of the Episcopal Conference of the Pacific since 2010, Mafi has likely dealt with a range of issues from climate change to social justice, areas where the Church has increasingly taken more progressive stances under Pope Francis. However, the lack of specific statements or actions on controversial doctrinal issues (e.g., LGBT rights, women's ordination) in the provided text prevents a full assessment as strongly progressive. Thus, his score reflects a moderate, rather than extreme, leaning towards progressivism within the context of Catholic Church politics and theology.