Víctor Manuel "Tucho" Fernández (born 18 July 1962) is an Argentine prelate of the Catholic Church and a theologian. He is currently the head of the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith. He served as rector of the Pontifical Catholic University of Argentina from December 2009 to April 2018. He was named Archbishop of La Plata on 2 June 2018. On 1 July 2023, Pope Francis named Fernández prefect of the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith as of mid-September. Pope Francis made Fernández a cardinal on 30 September 2023. He was born on 18 July 1962 in Alcira Gigena, in Córdoba Province. His father Emilio was a shopkeeper who supported Raúl Alfonsín, the radical political leader. Fernández entered the seminary in 1978. He was ordained as a deacon on 21 December 1985, and to the priesthood on 15 August 1986 for the Roman Catholic Diocese of Villa de la Concepción del Río Cuarto. After his ordination, he went to Rome where he studied Biblical theology at the Pontifical Gregorian University, graduating with a Licentiate of Sacred Theology (STL) in 1988. He returned to Argentina to undertake a doctorate in the Faculty of Theology of the Catholic University of Argentina, which he completed in 1990. His early career was focused on catechesis, lay formation and working at his diocese' seminary. He served as formator and director of studies at the seminary of Río Cuarto from 1988 to 1993 and from 2000 to 2007. In the intervening years, between 1993 and 2000, he was the parish priest of Parish of Santa Teresita in Río Cuarto, Córdoba. In the late 1990s, he followed the recommendation of the Archbishop of Buenos Aires Jorge Bergoglio and declined an invitation to head a theological institute in Bogotá.

Role: Prefect of theDicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith
Country: Argentina
Order: CD

Political Analysis: Víctor Manuel "Tucho" Fernández's career and theological positions suggest a leaning towards the more liberal/progressive end of the spectrum within the context of Catholic Church politics. His close association with Pope Francis, a pontiff known for his relatively progressive stance on various issues, is a significant indicator of his own leanings. Being named the head of the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith by Pope Francis, a role that is central to the interpretation and defense of Church teachings, implies trust in Fernández's alignment with the Pope's vision for the Church. Fernández's academic background in Biblical theology and his focus on catechesis and lay formation suggest an emphasis on pastoral care and a potentially more inclusive approach to Church doctrine. His early decision, influenced by Jorge Bergoglio (later Pope Francis), to decline a position in Bogotá in favor of pastoral and formative roles in Argentina, indicates a preference for practical theology and pastoral work over more doctrinaire positions. This background, combined with his roles in Church governance and education, points to a progressive stance on Church reform, governance, and engagement with contemporary issues, albeit within the framework of Catholic theology and tradition.